
Item cold-start: recommending StackExchange questions
=====================================================

In this example we'll use the StackExchange dataset to explore
recommendations under item-cold start. Data dumps from the StackExchange
network are available at https://archive.org/details/stackexchange, and
we'll use one of them --- for stats.stackexchange.com --- here.

The consists of users answering questions: in the user-item interaction
matrix, each user is a row, and each question is a column. Based on
which users answered which questions in the training set, we'll try to
recommend new questions in the training set.

Let's start by loading the data. We'll use the ``datasets`` module.

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    
    from lightfm.datasets import fetch_stackexchange
    
    data = fetch_stackexchange('crossvalidated',
                               test_set_fraction=0.1,
                               indicator_features=False,
                               tag_features=True)
    
    train = data['train']
    test = data['test']

Let's examine the data:

.. code:: python

    print('The dataset has %s users and %s items, '
          'with %s interactions in the test and %s interactions in the training set.'
          % (train.shape[0], train.shape[1], test.getnnz(), train.getnnz()))


.. parsed-literal::

    The dataset has 3221 users and 72360 items, with 4307 interactions in the test and 57830 interactions in the training set.


The training and test set are divided chronologically: the test set
contains the 10% of interactions that happened after the 90% in the
training set. This means that many of the questions in the test set have
no interactions. This is an accurate description of a questions
answering system: it is most important to recommend questions that have
not yet been answered to the expert users who can answer them.

A pure collaborative filtering model
------------------------------------

This is clearly a cold-start scenario, and so we can expect a
traditional collaborative filtering model to do very poorly. Let's check
if that's the case:

.. code:: python

    # Import the model
    from lightfm import LightFM
    
    # Set the number of threads; you can increase this
    # if you have more physical cores available.
    NUM_THREADS = 2
    NUM_COMPONENTS = 30
    NUM_EPOCHS = 3
    ITEM_ALPHA = 1e-6
    
    # Let's fit a WARP model: these generally have the best performance.
    model = LightFM(loss='warp',
                    item_alpha=ITEM_ALPHA,
                   no_components=NUM_COMPONENTS)
    
    # Run 3 epochs and time it.
    %time model = model.fit(train, epochs=NUM_EPOCHS, num_threads=NUM_THREADS)


.. parsed-literal::

    CPU times: user 12.9 s, sys: 8 ms, total: 12.9 s
    Wall time: 6.52 s


As a means of sanity checking, let's calculate the model's AUC on the
training set first. If it's reasonably high, we can be sure that the
model is not doing anything stupid and is fitting the training data
well.

.. code:: python

    # Import the evaluation routines
    from lightfm.evaluation import auc_score
    
    # Compute and print the AUC score
    train_auc = auc_score(model, train, num_threads=NUM_THREADS).mean()
    print('Collaborative filtering train AUC: %s' % train_auc)


.. parsed-literal::

    Collaborative filtering train AUC: 0.887519


Fantastic, the model is fitting the training set well. But what about
the test set?

.. code:: python

    # We pass in the train interactions to exclude them from predictions.
    # This is to simulate a recommender system where we do not
    # re-recommend things the user has already interacted with in the train
    # set.
    test_auc = auc_score(model, test, train_interactions=train, num_threads=NUM_THREADS).mean()
    print('Collaborative filtering test AUC: %s' % test_auc)


.. parsed-literal::

    Collaborative filtering test AUC: 0.34728


This is terrible: we do worse than random! This is not very surprising:
as there is no training data for the majority of the test questions, the
model cannot compute reasonable representations of the test set items.

The fact that we score them lower than other items (AUC < 0.5) is due to
estimated per-item biases, which can be confirmed by setting them to
zero and re-evaluating the model.

.. code:: python

    # Set biases to zero
    model.item_biases *= 0.0
    
    test_auc = auc_score(model, test, train_interactions=train, num_threads=NUM_THREADS).mean()
    print('Collaborative filtering test AUC: %s' % test_auc)


.. parsed-literal::

    Collaborative filtering test AUC: 0.496266


A hybrid model
--------------

We can do much better by employing LightFM's hybrid model capabilities.
The StackExchange data comes with content information in the form of
tags users apply to their questions:

.. code:: python

    item_features = data['item_features']
    tag_labels = data['item_feature_labels']
    
    print('There are %s distinct tags, with values like %s.' % (item_features.shape[1], tag_labels[:3].tolist()))


.. parsed-literal::

    There are 1246 distinct tags, with values like [u'bayesian', u'prior', u'elicitation'].


We can use these features (instead of an identity feature matrix like in
a pure CF model) to estimate a model which will generalize better to
unseen examples: it will simply use its representations of item features
to infer representations of previously unseen questions.

Let's go ahead and fit a model of this type.

.. code:: python

    # Define a new model instance
    model = LightFM(loss='warp',
                    item_alpha=ITEM_ALPHA,
                    no_components=NUM_COMPONENTS)
    
    # Fit the hybrid model. Note that this time, we pass
    # in the item features matrix.
    model = model.fit(train,
                    item_features=item_features,
                    epochs=NUM_EPOCHS,
                    num_threads=NUM_THREADS)

As before, let's sanity check the model on the training set.

.. code:: python

    # Don't forget the pass in the item features again!
    train_auc = auc_score(model,
                          train,
                          item_features=item_features,
                          num_threads=NUM_THREADS).mean()
    print('Hybrid training set AUC: %s' % train_auc)


.. parsed-literal::

    Hybrid training set AUC: 0.86049


Note that the training set AUC is lower than in a pure CF model. This is
fine: by using a lower-rank item feature matrix, we have effectively
regularized the model, giving it less freedom to fit the training data.

Despite this the model does much better on the test set:

.. code:: python

    test_auc = auc_score(model,
                        test,
                        train_interactions=train,
                        item_features=item_features,
                        num_threads=NUM_THREADS).mean()
    print('Hybrid test set AUC: %s' % test_auc)


.. parsed-literal::

    Hybrid test set AUC: 0.703039


This is as expected: because items in the test set share tags with items
in the training set, we can provide better test set recommendations by
using the tag representations learned from training.

Bonus: tag embeddings
---------------------

One of the nice properties of the hybrid model is that the estimated tag
embeddings capture semantic characteristics of the tags. Like the
word2vec model, we can use this property to explore semantic tag
similarity:

.. code:: python

    def get_similar_tags(model, tag_id):
        # Define similarity as the cosine of the angle
        # between the tag latent vectors
        
        # Normalize the vectors to unit length
        tag_embeddings = (model.item_embeddings.T
                          / np.linalg.norm(model.item_embeddings, axis=1)).T
        
        query_embedding = tag_embeddings[tag_id]
        similarity = np.dot(tag_embeddings, query_embedding)
        most_similar = np.argsort(-similarity)[1:4]
        
        return most_similar
    
    
    for tag in (u'bayesian', u'regression', u'survival'):
        tag_id = tag_labels.tolist().index(tag)
        print('Most similar tags for %s: %s' % (tag_labels[tag_id],
                                                tag_labels[get_similar_tags(model, tag_id)]))


.. parsed-literal::

    Most similar tags for bayesian: [u'posterior' u'mcmc' u'bayes']
    Most similar tags for regression: [u'multicollinearity' u'stepwise-regression' u'multiple-regression']
    Most similar tags for survival: [u'cox-model' u'kaplan-meier' u'odds-ratio']

